\documentclass[]{article}

%opening
\title{French Settlement in Northern New York}
\author{Kevin Contino}

\begin{document}

\maketitle

\begin{abstract}
This post describes the early-nineteenth century settlement of Northern New York by French immigrants. The region's history shows that French developers, particularly the Le Ray family, were highly important during its earliest Euro-American settlement. However, only a small proportion of those who actually settled the region were French. Early French settlers were quickly and heavily outnumbered by New Englanders. Consequently, the French legacy in Northern New York is limited and difficult to trace.
\end{abstract}

\section{Setting the Stage: Macomb's Purchase}
In 1784, the Oneida Indians ceded all of Northern New York to New York State. The land was mostly unsettled. Although the area served as a hunting ground for several Native American tribes, including the Oneida, their presence was minimal by this period .

A few ruined forts along the Saint Lawrence River were the main trace of Euro-American activity. The nearest American settlements were dozens of miles away, in the Mohawk Valley and along Lake Champlain. 

Almost a decade later, in 1791, the New York State Board of Land Commissioners auctioned most of it off in six “Great Tracts." In total, 3.7 million acres of land were to be sold (Gravit, 1850). A New York City-based syndicate led by Alexander Macomb, an Irish-born fur trader, purchased all six of the Great Tracts at eight cents per acre (New York State Association of Counties, 1982). Macomb’s Purchase included almost all of four present-day counties: Jefferson, Lewis, Saint Lawrence, and Franklin (see Figure 1) (Schaeper, 1995). The largest piece of land in the area excluded from the purchase, the Saint Lawrence Ten Towns (also labeled in Figure 1), had been purchased by Macomb several years earlier (Hawkins, 1968).
 
Macomb was uninterested in developing this enormous land purchase. Instead, he hoped to make a fortune in land speculation. Macomb planned to divide his purchase into much smaller plots to be sold at a significant markup. But this plan never came to fruition: Macomb’s failure to swiftly capitalize on his purchase in Northern New York, along with several other failed business ventures, depleted his fortune and left him at the mercy of his creditors, sending him into bankruptcy and debtor’s prison (Hawkins, 1968).
 
Macomb’s associate, William Constable, had been supervisor of Great Tracts Four, Five, and Six (which comprised most of present-day Jefferson and Lewis Counties). With Macomb’s ruin, Constable gained sole title to this portion of Macomb’s purchase (Ellis et al, 1957). Attempting to find some way to profit off of his lands, Constable went to Paris with an offer for his friend, a French nobleman named James Le Ray de Chaumont: If Le Ray could find enough interested investors, Northern New York could become into a haven for refugees of the French Revolution (Hawkins, 1968). 

\section{Introducing James Le Ray de Chaumont}
James Le Ray de Chaumont was the scion of a prominent family of French aristocrats. James’ father, Jacques Leray de Chaumont , had become wealthy as the owner of a merchant fleet, and he had earned his family’s aristocratic title several decades earlier with the purchase of the Chateau de Chaumont in the Loire Valley (Schaper, 1995).  As someone who had made much of his fortune through sea trade, Jacques Leray had longstanding ties with the United States, and he ranked among the earliest and most fervent French supporters of the American Revolution. When Benjamin Franklin and John Adams came to France to plead for aid, Jacques Leray was their host, and he used his influence to buy Franklin and Adams time before the court of Louis XVI (Hawkins, 1968)

Jacques Leray loaned much of his family’s wealth to the American colonies during the American Revolution. After the war, the United States was unable to repay its debts, leaving Leray and his family on the brink of financial ruin (Hawkins, 1968). Leray also incurred losses through land speculation in North America, and the war disrupted sea trade, his primary source of income (Schaeper, 1995).

In 1785, Leray sent his son James to represent Jacques’ claims against the new American government. At the time, James was only twenty-five. He spent several years pleading his father’s case before Congress, but met no success (Hawkins, 1968). Some historians have suggested that Le Ray, who was 25 years old at the time, was so young that Congress did not take him seriously (Schaeper, 1995). By 1789, Jacques Le Ray was bankrupt, and his creditors had begun to seize his family’s assets. James Le Ray gave up and returned to France in the following year (Hawkins, 1968).

During his time in the United States, James Le Ray became an American citizen and married the daughter of a wealthy New Jersey family. This was also when he met and befriended William Constable, who at the time was working as a fur trader in New York City (Hawkins, 1968). Constable was aware of Le Ray’s connections, financial desperation, and ties to the United States and for this reason saw in James an obvious opportunity to make his lands in Northern New York profitable. When Constable sought Le Ray’s help, he caught Le Ray’s interest immediately (Schaper, 1995).

\section{(Early Settlement: 1794 - 1805)}
James Le Ray’s intent was different from Macomb’s from the start: Le Ray was a developer, and his interest in the North Country was based his own vision for what the land could become rather than a short-term concern for profit (though recovering his family fortune was among Le Ray’s goals, and likely his deepest motivation) (Schaeper, 1995). In 1792, he made his first attempt to purchase land in Northern New York by forming the Antwerp Company with the aid of his brother-in-law, Peter Chassanis (Hawkins, 1968). While Le Ray lacked the financial capacity to back this venture himself, he had both connections and charm, and with the support of dozens of American and European investors, the Antwerp Land Company purchased over 600,000 acres, comprising all of Great Tract Four in addition to portions of Great Tract Five lying north of the Black River (shown in Figure 1) (Schaper, 1995). Despite the skill with which Le Ray attracted financial backing, this project fell through within a year, and Le Ray and Chassanis was forced returned the land to Constable (Hawkins, 1968).  

In 1794, Le Ray and Chassanis made a second attempt to purchase land from Constable, this time with more success. The two Frenchmen formed the Castorland Company, and re-purchased 215,000 acres of what they had previously held under the Antwerp Company, a tract labeled “Peter Chassanis and Co.” in Figure 1 (Hawkins, 1968). The Castorland Company took its name from the French word for beaver (castor), of which there were many in the region (Schaeper, 1995).

Peter Chassanis led the first attempt at settlement in 1793. He took a group of twenty aristocratic families into Castorland, where he and Le Ray had already begun to make elaborate plans, plotting locations for highways, bridges, mills, and future cities (Hawkins, 1968). Chassanis’ group succeeded in building the first highway into the Black River Valley, or what is now Jefferson and Lewis counties (Landon, 1932). But the harsh environment and isolation proved too much for Chassanis’ party of high-born settlers to overcome. Fewer than expected had signed up for the expedition to begin with, and many settlers died during the first winter, which was harsher than anyone had anticipated. Most of those remaining left within the next year. Although two villages stand today at the sites of the settlements founded by the Chassanis company (Carthage, originally named Long Falls, shown in Figure 2, and Castorland), most of the French settlers had returned to France within the first year of Chassanis’ expedition (Hawkins, 1968). By 1814, every member of the original group of French settlers had either died or emigrated (New York State Association of Counties, 1982). Northern New York, it seemed, was not destined to become a haven for aristocratic refugees of the French Revolution.

Le Ray was not discouraged by this failure, and he reacted by adapting to the realities of the frontier environment. In 1798, when the state legislature disallowed non-citizens from owning property, Le Ray bought out his partners and became the sole owner of Castorland. Furthermore, he set about purchasing the former lands of the ill-fated Antwerp Company. By 1800, Le Ray had re-acquired most of these lands. At this point, all 600,000 acres originally held by the Antwerp Company are referred to as Castorland (see Figure 2) (Schaeper, 1995).

In 1800, Le Ray sponsored a second attempt at settlement. This expedition was led by Jacob Brown, a Quaker from Bucks County, Pennsylvania (New York State Association of Counties, 1982). By now, Le Ray had abandoned his original plan to re-settle refugees of the French Revolution in Castorland; Brown’s party consisted entirely of American settlers, mostly Vermonters. Brown established his settlement about four miles upstream from the mouth of the Black River. This settlement would eventually become the Village of Brownville (shown in Figure 2) (Hough, 1854). 

\section{James Le Ray Comes to Northern New York (1805 - 1820)}
With the success of Brown’s settlement, James Le Ray decided to move his family to Northern New York. He imported livestock and skilled artisans to his new estate, and built a mansion in the neoclassical style on the site of what is now Fort Drum (New York State Association of Counties, 1982). A village would quickly spring up near the site of his mansion, persisting until the mid-twentieth century when it was displaced to make way for the expansion of Fort Drum. Le Ray and his family relocated to this mansion in 1806, and though it burned to the ground in 1822, Le Ray’s eldest son, Vincent, would rebuild it immediately on the same site (Hawkins, 1968). Unlike most of the structures erected by French nobles in Northern New York, Le Ray’s second mansion remains standing today, and has been used by the military since Fort Drum (then called Camp Drum) became an army reservation in 1940, first as the commanding officer’s residence, and later as a guest house for visiting dignitaries (Wagner, 2003).

In the wake of Jacob Brown’s success, settlement began in earnest throughout much of Castorland. Cape Vincent was first settled in 1801, and Chaumont was first settled in 1802, both by groups of New Englanders working under the direction of Le Ray. That same year, Le Ray established his land office, Chaumont House, in Chaumont. In 1804, Le Ray sold a piece of land to a group of Quakers, who establish a settlement at the site of what would become the Village of Philadelphia (Hough, 1854). By 1805, the area was thickly settled enough that a movement led by several Watertown-based merchants succeeded in convincing the state legislature to create the counties of Jefferson and Lewis (New York State Association of Counties, 1982). 

James Le Ray continued working to develop his land and attract new settlers. Convinced that improved roads were the key to solidifying the importance of the Northern New York and at bringing in sttlers, he helped to develop the Saint Lawrence Turnpike Company and served as its President (Schaeper, 1995). The Saint Lawrence Turnpike would eventually extend across Macomb’s Purchase, from the Black River Valley just south of the Le Ray Mansion, to Malone in the northernmost reaches of Franklin County (Landon, 1932). In addition to opening much of Saint Lawrence and Jefferson counties to settlement, the road would become a key strategic resource for the United States during the War of 1812, allowing for the quick movement of troops and materiel along the length of the Canadian border. Later, Le Ray would serve as President of the Jefferson County Agricultural Society, arranging the first county fair. In addition, Le Ray donated parcels of land for the construction of numerous churches, both Catholic and Protestant. Le Ray also campaigned for the construction of the Erie Canal, though he envisioned a different route for it – one that connected the Hudson River to Lake Ontario through the Black River Valley, passing through Castorland and bypassing Western New York (Schaeper, 1995). 

In 1815, James Le Ray’s financial problems recurred, and he was forced to return to France. He deeded his lands in Northern New York to his son, Vincent, who had recently finished building a stone house in what would become Cape Vincent (Schaper, 1995). As Vincent had recently married Cornelia Juhel, the daughter of affluent New York City family, he did not share in his father’s financial troubles and was free to continue investing in the development of his father’s former lands (Hawkins, 1968).

\section{A Second Wave of French Settlement (1820 - 1836)}
Another round of French immigration to Northern New York occurred after 1815 (Schaeper, 1995). While New Englanders would always outnumber French settlers in the region, this primarily non-aristocratic wave of immigrants would prove more resilient than the first. Table 2 shows that as of 1850, nearly 1,500 residents of the Jefferson County section of Castorland had French surnames. Cape Vincent had the highest share of residents with French surnames, as James Le Ray had convinced several groups of French settlers to immigrate there while he was in France (Child, 1890). 

One of the most notable figures involved in this period of settlement was Joseph Bonaparte, former King of Spain and brother to Napoleon Bonaparte. Sometime before 1820, James Le Ray convinced Joseph Bonaparte to purchase a piece of land in Northern New York as a place of exile (Hawkins, 1968). Bonaparte’s tract was 26,000 acres in size, comprising the present towns of Diana, Wilna, and Antwerp (Schaeper, 1995). Bonaparte would spend several summers visiting his holdings in Northern New York. He planned the settlement that is now the Village of Natural Bridge, around the site of one of his homes. Most impressive among Bonaparte’s projects was the Hermitage, a summer resort situated on the southeast shore of Lake Diana (now called Lake Bonaparte, shown in Figure 2) (Schaeper, 1995). In 1830, Bonaparte sold his holdings and permanently withdrew to his estate in New Jersey (New York State Association of Counties, 1982). The Hermitage fell into disuse and was destroyed by fire not long after Bonaparte’s departure (Hawkins, 1968). Today, no trace of Bonaparte’s summer resort remains, and Lake Bonaparte hosts only a few scattered cottages.

Another French noble involved in this stage of settlement was Baroness Jenika de Feriet, an old friend of James Le Ray. In 1820, Le Ray sold de Feriet a tract of land on a bend in the Black River. De Feriet built at this site a mansion she named the Hermitage (not to be confused with Joseph Bonaparte’s Hermitage on Lake Diana. De Feriet was forced to mortgage her holdings in 1828 amidst financial difficulties; she attempted to ameliorate these problems by building a village, but her project failed to attract settlers, only sinking her further into debt. In 1841, de Feriet returned to France in destitution. Her mansion remained standing until it burned to the ground in 1871; today, only overgrown stone pathways remain. Jenika de Feriet’s estate stood abandoned until 1901, when the Saint Regis Paper Mill was constructed at its site. One of the largest paper mills in the world at the time of its construction, the Saint Regis Paper Mill was accompanied by a company town, named Deferiet after the site’s former occupant (shown in Figure 2). Deferiet’s population peaked at 1,500 in 1922 (Hawkins, 1968). The mill has since closed, and today the village is home its ruins and about one hundred residents.

Another notable settler who arrived in Northern New York during this period was John la Farge, a French merchant who had been living in New York City for several years. During the early 1820s, La Farge purchased Penet’s Square, a tract of land that had been excluded from both Macomb’s Purchase and the 1784 treaty between New York State and the Oneida Indians (Ellis et al., 1957). For reasons that are not entirely clear, Penet’s Square, containing exactly 100 square miles of land, was set aside for Peter Penet at the signing of the 1784 treaty. Penet not long after being granted title to the tract, and his lands became a haven for a group of squatters known as the Catfish People because of their diet. By the time the state had re-acquired the land and sold it to la Farge, the Catfish People had been living on Penet’s Square for several decades and numbered in the low hundreds (Hough, 1854).

The Catfish People resented la Farge’s presence and claim to their lands. Despite la Farge’s efforts to placate them (he even granted most squatters title to the land that they had settled), the Catfish People attempted to kill him and burned his first mansion to the ground. La Farge built a second mansion, modeled on Le Ray’s, and worked to seriously develop Catfish Falls (later renamed La Fargeville, as shown in Figure 2), but in 1837 he returned to New York City in frustration and never returned (Hough, 1854).

The Le Ray’s did not evade the misfortune that plagued many of Northern New York’s early settlers. By 1836, Vincent Le Ray had come to share in his family’s financial problems. Since the construction of the Erie Canal, his work in Northern New York had become unprofitable, and settlement had slowed. In response to these difficulties, Vincent sold the Le Ray mansion and returned to France (Hawkins, 1968). Vincent left behind an agent at his family’s land office in Chaumont, which would remain staffed until 1914 (Child, 1890). The Le Ray family continued to hold title to lands in Northern New York until the mid-twentieth century (Hawkins, 1968).

\section{Persisting French Influence? (1836 - present)}
As far as I have been able to determine, the number of French Settlers in Northern New York was never large. The 1810 Census shows only 101 residents with French surnames in all of Jefferson County, or less than one percent of the total population (see Table 1). Over one third of these individuals were members of James Le Ray’s household. 

Most of the region’s earliest settlers were from Vermont and other parts of New England (Landon, 1932). Even after the second wave of French immigration, their influence was limited. In the Jefferson County portion of Castorland, the 1850 Census records a total of 1,487 residents with French surnames out of a total population of 40,063, or 3.7 percent (see Table 2).   While over 20 percent of Cape Vincent residents had French surnames, in only three other towns did this figure exceed 3 percent: Le Ray (5.8%), Alexandria (5.4%), and Clayton (4.1%). French settlers seem to have been present in negligible quantities except in the vicinity of Le Ray’s estate and along the Saint Lawrence River.

The Le Ray family, at least, is memorialized through a slate of local place names: Cape Vincent (named for Vincent Le Ray), Alexandria Bay (named for Alexander, Vincent’s brother), Theresa (named for Theresa, Vincent’s sister), Chaumont, and now-abandoned LeRaysville settlement (Hawkins, 1968). Names of other French settlers persist as well:  La Fargeville, Depauville, and Deferiet. Other names have vanished from the landscape, including two places named after Cornelia Juhel, Vincent Le Ray’s wife: Cornelia, though it still bears the street grid and central park shown in Vincent Le Ray’s 1821 plan, was renamed Clayton in 1831 in honor of a Whig Senator from Delaware, and Juhelsville, a village on the North shore of the Black River, was annexed by the City of Watertown in 1869 (Hough, 1854). Jamesville, a village south of Alexandria Bay named for James Le Ray, is now known as Redwood (Schaeper, 1995).

The French legacy in the North Country also extends to a number of historic structures and public spaces that remain in use today. The Le Ray mansion on Fort Drum, Vincent Le Ray’s stone house in Cape Vincent, Chaumont House, the Orleans Hotel (la Farge’s land office), and other buildings remain standing and in use today. The Le Rays also donated the land for Clayton’s Public Square, Watertown’s first public cemetery, and numerous churches throughout Northern New York (Hawkins, 1968). 

Every history of the region makes it clear that the Le Ray family played an important role in attracting early settlers, merchants, and investors to the North Country. James and Vincent lent direct financial support to a number of successful business ventures, and were instrumental in the construction of numerous roads, bridges, mills, and taverns (Hawkins, 1968). Furthermore, it was largely through their efforts, wealth, and connections that places such as Brownville, Philadelphia, Natural Bridge, Clayton, and Carthage were settled, in addition to all of the settlements mentioned earlier that bear French names.

Many of the difficulties encountered by French settlers in Northern New York can be attributed to the region’s remoteness. For decades after settlement began, the area could be reached only by poorly maintained roads running through sparsely populated areas of dense forest and harsh terrain (New York State Association of Counties, 1982). Even with the opening of the Erie Canal in 1824, this situation did not improve; in fact, in many ways, it was made worse. The canal opened the Great Lakes to commerce – but it largely bypassed Northern New York. Settlement instead was redirected westward, and the area remained a backwater. Instead of increasing the value of land in the region, as James Le Ray had hoped, land values in Northern New York plummeted following the opening of the canal (Schaeper, 1995).

Furthermore, the region was less inviting to settlers than lands farther west. Northern New York is a region of rugged topography, stony soils, short growing seasons, and harsh winters. The French nobles who attempted to settle Northern New York were hardly alone in their failure. The area disappointed land speculators of all stripes, as settlers continually passed over the region in favor of more hospitable lands in Western New York and later, the Middle West (Ellis et al., 1957). During the early years of the nineteenth century, as it became increasingly clear just how difficult the winters were, the value of land holdings in the area depreciated significantly (Schaeper, 1995).

For much of the early nineteenth century, Northern New York remained an isolated region of subsistence farmers and localized manufacturing. It was not the ideal location for mansions and lavish vacation homes, and it was not a place that could be receptive to grandiose plans. The physical geography of Northern New York would have been a challenge for any group of settlers, but the French aristocrats who sought to make it their home were especially ill-suited. The lucky left in bankruptcy, and the unlucky died during the snows of winter. Later, nobles like Jenika de Feriet and John la Farge would see their plans frustrated by the realities of the landscape. The Le Rays persisted far longer than most others, facilitated much of the region’s early settlement, and left a faint but indelible impression.

\section{Further Reading}


\end{document}
